Regional Offices of Directorate of Technical Education

SN	Name and Address of Regional Office	Contact Number and Email Address	Districts


1	Amravati Region
Joint Director, Technical Education Regional Office, Govt.Polytechnic Campus, New Cotton Market Road, Sahkarnagar, Amravati-444603	
Phone : 0721-2573027
Fax : 0721-2577913
Email :            roamravati@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website : http://www.jdroamt.org

1.	Amravati
2.	Akola
3.	Buldhana
4.	Yawatmal
5.	Washim



2	Aurangabad Region
Joint Director, Technical Education Regional Office Station Road, Osmanpura, Near Govt.Polytechnic campus, P.O. Box No.119, Aurangabad- 431005	

Phone : 0240-2334216(P),2334769(O) Fax : 0240-2356820
Email :               roaurangabad@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website : http://www.dteau.org
1.	Aurangabad
2.	Beed
3.	Jalna
4.	Latur
5.	Hingoli
6.	Nanded
7.	Parbhani
8.	Osmanabad


Mumbai Region		
1.	Mumbai
2.	Mumbai Suburban
3.	Thane
4.	Raigad
5.	Ratnagiri
6.	Sindhudurg
7.	Palghar


3	Joint Director, Technical Education Regional Office, World Bank Project Building, Govt. Polytechnic Campus, 49- Kherwadi, Aliyawar Jung Marg, Bandra(East), Mumbai – 400051	Phone : 022-26474892,26471619
Fax : 022-26474892,26471619
Email :               romumbai@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website:http://www.jdteromumbai.com




4	Nagpur Region
Joint Director,Technical Education Regional Office, Govt.Polytechnic Campus, Sadar Bazar, Nagpur – 440001	Phone : 0712-2565143,2549387
Fax : 0712-2561663
Email :              ronagpur@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website: http://www.rdtenagpur.org.in

1.	Bhandara
2.	Chandrapur
3.	Gondhia
4.	Gadchiroli
5.	Nagpur
6.	Wardha



5	Nashik Region
Joint Director,Technical Education Regional Office, New Polytechnic Area, Post Box No. 217, Samangaon Road, Nashik Road, Nashik – 422101	
Phone : 0253-2461479,2460114 (P) Fax : 0253-2455301
Email :           ronashik@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website : http://mail.dtensk.org

1.	Ahmednagar
2.	Jalgaon
3.	Dhule
4.	Nashik
5.	Nandurbar
	Pune Region		


6	Joint Director, Technical Education Regional Office, 412- E, Shivaji Nagar, Bahirat Patil Chowk, Pune- 411016	Phone : 020-25656234,25678973
Fax : 020-25656234
Email : ropune@dtemaharashtra.gov.in Website : http://www.ropune.org.in
1.	Pune
2.	Kolhapur
3.	Satara
4.	Sangli
5.	Solapur
 

 


Rule. No	Title	Page No
1	Short title and commencement	7
1A	Abbreviations used in the brochure	7
2	Definitions	8
3	Role and Responsibilities of Competent Authority	12
4	Eligibility Criteria	12
5	Candidature Type	15
6	Sanctioned Intake, Reservations and Supernumerary Seats for
various Courses	18
7	Allocation of Seats	18
8	Preparation of Merit List	20
9	Centralised Admission Process (CAP)	22
10	CAP allotment stages and process of allotment	30
11	Allotment of seats by CAP Rounds I and II	33
12	General provisions	33
13	Admissions in Institutional Quota and vacant seats after CAP	35
14	Approval of Merit List and the Admitted Candidates List	36
15	Cancellation of Admission and Refund of fees, return of documents
by Institutions	36
16	Change of Course or Institution after First, Second Year	37
17	Fees and Concessions	38
18	Miscellaneous provisions	41
Schedule -I	For First Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses	44
	A (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the
Government and Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions	44
	A (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the Unaided Private Technical Diploma Educational Institutions	44
	A(3) . Allocation of Supernumerary Seats	46
Schedule -II	For First Year of Post HSC Diploma Courses	53
 

	B (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the
Government and Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions	53
	B (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the
Unaided Private Technical Diploma Educational Institutions	53
	B (3). Allocation of Supernumerary Seats,	54
Schedule -III	For Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses	60
	C (1). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the
Government and Aided Technical Diploma Educational Institutions	60
	C (2). Allocation of Seats for admissions to the Diploma, into the
Unaided Private Technical Diploma Educational Institutions.	60
	C(3) Distribution of seats for Admission to Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses as per eligibility criteria	61
Schedule -IV	Reservations	62
	1.1 Reservation for Socially, Educationally & Economically
Backward Class Candidates	62
	1.2 Reservations for Persons with Disability Candidates	63
	1.3 Reservations for Orphan Candidates	63
	1.4 Reservation for sons / daughters of Defense Service Personnel	63
	1.5 Reservation for female candidates	64
	1.6 Reservation for EWS Candidate	64
	1.7 Reservation in Government Institutes with Second Shift Courses
for Religious Minority Students: - (For First Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses and Direct Second Year)	64
	1.8 Documents required to claim reservation for Backward Class candidates and Tuition Fee Waiver Scheme	65
Annexure I	List of the Government institutes with second shift courses in which
70% seats are reserved for Religious minority candidates belonging to Muslim, Buddhist, Christian, Sikh, Parsi and Jain community	66
Annexure II	Documents to be uploaded online/attached along with Application
Form for Centralized Admission Process	67
	(A) For First Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses	67
 	(B) For First Year of Post HSC Diploma Courses	69
	(C) For Direct Second Year of Post SSC Diploma Courses	71


Annexure III	
The Group and Subgroup of qualifying group and corresponding diploma courses for admission to Direct Second year of Post SSC
Diploma	74
Annexure IV	The List of unique courses for which the admission for First Year of Post SSC Diploma shall be carried out as per State Level Merit in
the CAP.	85
Annexure V	Scholarship Scheme Under Technical Education Department	86
Pro forma - A	For Type – C Candidates :For sons and daughters of Central
Government / Government of India undertaking employees	89
Pro forma B - 1	For Type D Candidates :For sons and daughters of Maharashtra State Government/Maharashtra State Government undertaking
employees	90
Pro forma B - 2	For Type D Candidates : For sons and daughters of Maharashtra State Government/ Maharashtra State Government undertaking
retired employees	90
Pro forma C	For Def-1, Def-2 and Def-3 Candidates : For sons and daughters of defense service personnel	91
Pro forma D	For Def-3 candidates : For sons and daughters of Active defense
service personnel not domiciled in Maharashtra State	92
Pro forma E	For Def-3 candidates : For sons and daughters of Active defense service personnel not domiciled in Maharashtra State but retained
their family accommodation	92
Pro forma
F/F1/F2/F3/F4	For Persons with Disability Candidates	93
Pro forma
G1/G2	For Candidates from Maharashtra and Karnataka disputed Border
Area	100
Pro forma J	For sons and daughters of Defence / Paramilitary force / I.A.S. /
I.P.S. / I.F.S. / J& K Police officials posted in Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh to combat terrorist activities	101
Pro forma K	For Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh Migrant Candidates staying in refugee camps	101
 

Pro forma L	Displaced Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh Candidates staying with relatives /
friends in India other than Migrant / Refugee camp	102
Pro forma N	Candidate who has secured admission in any other institute shall produce certificate indicating his/ her original Leaving Certificate
retained with the previous institute	102
Pro forma O	Minority community student’s self declaration	103
Pro forma T	For Student Transfer : No objection certificate from parent institute,
no objection certificate from admitting institute	105
Pro forma U	For candidate claiming seats reserved for Orphan Candidates	107
Pro forma V	For candidate claiming seats reserved for Economically Weaker
Section Candidates	108


****
 

Government of Maharashtra has published the rules, called “Maharashtra State Technical Diploma Courses Educational Institutions (Admissions) Rules, 2019” on 17th May, 2019 and its amendment on 22nd July, 2020 for eligibility and admission to First Year and Direct Second year of various Technical Diploma courses in the State of Maharashtra. These Rules and its amendment also provides procedure about invitation of applications for admission, Eligibility Criteria, preparation of merit list, distribution of seats, various rounds and stages of Centralised Admission Process (CAP), admissions in Institutional Quota seats and vacant seats after CAP, supernumerary seats, cancellation of admission, approval of list of admitted candidates, refund of fees.
These Rules and its amendment shall apply for admission to the First Year and Direct Second year of Full Time Technical Diploma Courses in Engineering/ Technology & First Year of Diploma in Pharmacy and Hotel Management and Catering Technology conducted by various types of Institutions from Maharashtra State as described below-
a)	All Autonomous and Non Autonomous Government Polytechnics / Institutions
b)	All Government Aided Autonomous and Non Autonomous Polytechnics / Institutions including Minority Institutions
c)	All University managed Diploma Institutes/Polytechnics
d)	All Un-Aided Private Polytechnics including Minority institutes

1.	Short title and commencement. - (1) The Rules published on 17th May, 2019 may be called the Maharashtra State Technical Diploma Courses Educational Institutions (Admissions) Rules, 2019. The amendment is published on 22nd July, 2020.
(2) The amended rules shall come into force with effect from Academic Year 2020-21 onwards.

1-A. Abbreviations used in the brochure:
AICTE	All India Council for Technical Education CAP	Centralised Admission Process
CBSE	Central Board of Secondary Education CGPA	Cumulative Grade Point Average
DTE	Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra State EWS	Economically Weaker Section
GoI	Government of India
GoM	Government of Maharashtra
HD	Home District
ICSE	Indian Certificate of Secondary Education
MSBTE	Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education, Mumbai
MSBSHSE	Maharashtra State Board of Secondary & Higher Secondary Education NRI	Non Resident Indian
OHD	Outside Home District
OMS	Outside Maharashtra State
PIO	Persons of Indian Origin
SSC	Secondary School Certificate
HSC	Higher Secondary Certificate
PCI	Pharmacy Council of India
DVET	Directorate of Vocational Education and Training ITI	Industrial Training Institute
SL	State Level
SI	Sanctioned Intake
TFWS	Tuition Fee Waiver Scheme

2.	Definitions. -In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires, –

(a)	“Admission Reporting Centre” means a center where the Candidate shall report for confirmation of admission by verification of documents and payment of Seat Acceptance fees;
(b)	“Application Form” means prescribed Form filled up online by the Candidate for admission;
(c)	“appropriate authority” means the authorities declared by the State or Central Government which approve and regulate the Diploma courses or educational disciplines;
(d)	“Autonomous Institution” means the institution to which autonomy is granted by the Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education and Government of Maharashtra;
(e)	“BATU” means Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere;
(f)	“Candidate” means the candidate who is eligible for admission to various courses as notified by the Government, from time to time;
(g)	"Centralized Admission Process (CAP)” means the centralized process of admission carried out by the competent authority through single window system in a transparent manner for admitting the students for various courses in Technical Diploma educational institutions;
(h)	“Competent Authority” means the Director, Technical Education, Mumbai as appointed by the Government of Maharashtra to implement the admission process;
(i)	“Course” means the full time Technical Diploma Courses in Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy and Hotel Management and Catering Technology approved by the All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi and/or Pharmacy Council of India, New Delhi as the case may be;
(j)	“Department” means the Higher and Technical Education Department of Government of Maharashtra;
(k)	“Diploma” means a diploma awarded by concerned authority after successful completion of course of study;
(l)	“Director” means the Director of Technical Education, Maharashtra State;
(m)	“DTE” means Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra State;
(n)	“Facilitation Centre” means a Centre where the facilities like filling online Forms, verification of documents, confirmation of online forms and grievances, etc. are provided;
(o)	“Fees” means the amount fixed as fee which includes tuition fee, library fee, gymkhana fee, examination fee, development fee or amount payable for any curricular or co-curricular activities, laboratory fee, information brochure fee and any other amount collected from the students, by whatsoever name called, and accepted in whichever manner, that is made payable to an Educational Institution, for whatever purpose, by any candidate admitted to a Diploma course at such institution, but excludes any charges payable towards use of any optional hostel accommodation, mess charges and Students Insurance Fees;
(p)	“Foreign Student” means a student who is not a citizen of India; 
(q)	“Government” or “State Government” means the Government of Maharashtra;
(r)	“Home District” means the revenue district area as specified in sub rule (1) of rule 5;
(s)	“HSC” means the Higher Secondary School Certificate (Standard XII) examination conducted by the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education or its equivalent certificate awarded by a recognized Board;
(t)	“Institution” means an Educational Institution which runs Courses imparting technical education in Engineering and allied technical subjects leading to Diploma in Engineering / Technology and Pharmacy;
(u)	“Institutional Quota” means seats available for admission to the Eligible Candidates at Institution level as declared by the Government or appropriate authority, from time to time;
(v)	“Inter-Se-Merit” means the order of merit declared by the Competent Authority in respect of various classes or category of Candidates;
(w)	“ITI” means the Certificate Courses offered by Industrial Training Institution;
(x)	“Lateral Entry” means admission of students in second year of the course against seats as per the guidelines of the appropriate authorities;
(y)	“MSBTE” means the Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education established under section 3 of the Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education Act, 1997 (Mah. XXXVIII of 1997);
(z)	“Minority Quota” means seats earmarked for the Minority Community students from within the State, belonging to the Minority Community to which the institution belongs;
(aa) “Minority Educational Institution” means an Educational Institution notified as such by the State Government, established and administered for and by the persons belonging to the minority community, domiciled in the State of Maharashtra, having right to do so under clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution of India;
(bb) “Non-Autonomous Institution” means those institutions which are not declared as an ‘Autonomous Institution’ by MSBTE;
(cc) “Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” means a person who is “not ordinarily resident” under sub-section (6) of section 6 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, and includes a person resident outside India under clause (w) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, and also includes his child or ward;
 (dd) “Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)” means a candidate or a person registered as an Overseas Citizen of India as declared by the Central Government under section 7A of the Citizenship Act 1955 and includes Persons of Indian Origin (PIO);
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, all the existing Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) cardholders registered under notification of the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs No. F. No. 26011/04/98- F. I, dated 19th August 2002 and shall now be deemed to be Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) card holders by virtue of Notification of Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, No. 25024/9/2014- F.I., dated 9th January, 2015;
(ee) “OHD” means area Outside the Home District;
(ff) “Person of Indian Origin (PIO)” means a person who is a citizen of a country other than India but who, at any time, was a citizen of India; or in whose case either parent or any grandparent was a citizen of India by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the Constitution of India or under the Citizenship Act, 1955;
(gg) “Qualifying Examination” means examinations on the basis of which a candidate becomes eligible for admission or its equivalent examination;
(hh) “Sanctioned intake” means the total number of seats sanctioned or approved by the appropriate authority for admitting candidates in a single academic year in each course of study or discipline in an Educational Institution at the appropriate level of entry;
(ii)“SSC” means the Secondary School Certificate (Standard X) examination conducted by the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education or its equivalent certificate awarded by a recognized Board;
(jj) “Supernumerary Seats” means seats which are over and above the Sanctioned Intake approved by the appropriate authority and the Government, from time to time.
(kk) “University” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
(ll) "TFWS" means the Tuition Fee Waiver Scheme of All India Council for Technical Education.
